Steve's Stories. My name is Steve Fletcher. In 1990 I founded Swickr Carnival who have
organised Cardiff Carnival ever since.
Steve's Story number 2. Cardiff Carnival begins.
The first ever Cardiff Carnival took place in the summer of 1990. It was part of the
Cardiff Children's Festival which was itself part of the wider Cardiff Summer Festival.
The project back then was known as the Cardiff Mars Carnival as the primary international
influence was the Mars Carnival from Trinidad in the Caribbean.
The Carnival Camp is the name we give to the space where all the workshops in Carnival
design, making and decoration, samba drumming and processional dancing take place.
The very first Carnival Camp in 1990 involved three weeks of free Carnival Arts workshops
leading up to Carnival Day itself when the parade transforms the streets of Cardiff in
all its glory.
It was free to take part then and this is still the case now. It has always been important
to Swickr Carnival that we reach out to people from all walks of life and backgrounds and
there is no financial barrier to taking part.
The venue for the first ever Carnival Camp was Insoul Court in Landaff and the building
and the grounds were made available to us by Cardiff County Council free of charge.
It was a fabulous building whose history reflects the fortune and luxury of those who controlled
the coal trade.
So it was a particular joy to see it come to life with hundreds of exciting smiling
paint flecked young carnivalists and the majority of whom were bussed in from Butetown, that
area of Cardiff which equally owed much to the coal trade.
I often wondered how wealthy coal mine owner James Harvey Insoul would have felt about
his beautiful house and gardens being given over to the carnival enthused descendants
of the dockers and sailors who had helped build up his personal fortune.
The first ever Cardiff Carnival Parade took place as the highlight of the Cardiff Children's
Festival and our theme was inspired by the traditional sailor masquerade from Trinidad.
The parade involved over 200 young revelers in costumes dancing to live music from street
bands and culminating on the tiniest of stages in Cardiff Castle.
I distinctly remember the reaction of the shoppers who thronged Cardiff City Centre
on that first carnival day as they overcame their initial surprise and smiles bloomed
across their faces and then they began to cheer on the first ever Cardiff Carnival
Parade.
The first project was unusual in that due to funding conditions Swickr Carnival had
to restrict participation to young people aged 6 to 16.
However every Cardiff Carnival thereafter was as it should be, open to all ages and
intergenerational so as to allow enthusiasm, creativity and experience to flow between
young and old and new lasting friendships to begin and endure.